## TBMP - Project Overview

8/21/25

[Link to project repository](https://github.com/leavemydogalone/Prototype)

Hello! This is my first devblog post related to my first video game prototype, that I actually made all on my own! For lack of a better name, I will just call it Turn-Based Multiplayer Prototype (or **TBMP** for short). Right now, I am around the 4 month mark of development on this project and I think it is time to put it to rest.

I am super proud of all the I was able to get done and all the stuff I was able to learn, but it is unfortunately missing a pretty key feature that a game should have: fun. Because of this, I will be moving on to my next project where I will make "finding the fun" one of the first things in its design, rather than attempting to shove it in at the end. But before I do move on, I wanted to share some of the highlights of this development journey.

This first post will serve as an overview of the project goals and general design ideas, where later posts will dive deeper into specific design and programming topics that were the most interesting to me.

### My Goals

This project began with a mixture of ideas that did not necessarily sound like they would work together, but I thought they would offer a great learning opportunity to better understand the kinds of systems I would want to use in my future games. The big things I wanted to tackle were **Multiplayer using a dedicated server**, **Unreal's Gameplay Ability System (GAS)**, and a **turn-based** system.

### Unreal and Stephen Ulibarri

Multiplayer games are - and always have been - my favorite kinds of video games, and so I knew early on in my game development learning that I needed to learn multiplayer. Pretty much all online sources say that Unreal is the game engine for multiplayer - since it is a built-in feature - and everyone on the Unreal subreddit and Discord said that **competitive** multiplayer games in Unreal should use GAS and a dedicated server. I had a lot to learn before I could start making games I could get excited about.

Luckily for me, when I decided on learning Unreal, I saw several people on Unreal's Subreddit recommend several courses by Stephen Ulibarri, a course creator on the online learning platform, Udemy. Over the course of a year I followed his "Learn C++ for Game Development", and "Unreal Engine 4 Blueprints - The Ultimate Developer Course", and I was just about to start on his "Unreal Engine 5 C++ Multiplayer Shooter" when I checked back in on his course catalogue and he had just a few weeks earlier dropped a new course called "[Create a multiplayer RPG with Unreal Engine's Gameplay Ability System (GAS)!](https://www.udemy.com/course/unreal-engine-5-gas-top-down-rpg/)". I was beyond excited, purchased the course and started on it immediately.

### Unreal's Gameplay Ability System

As many who have tried to learn GAS know, the official documentation and learning material related to GAS is not great; as a matter of fact, it is largely non-existent. For some time, the internet would suggest surface level Youtube videos, which were good at introducing GAS's main features, but not anything more complex that would be required in a _real_ game, or it would suggest the Lyra project, which was Unreal's attempt to demonstrate how Unreal's developers would structure a multiplayer project, using GAS. Unfortunately, Lyra, an absolute behemoth of a project, is, in my opinion, not only _not_ a suitable learning source for beginners to GAS due to its size, but it also lacks the optimization to serve as a credible example to base my own code off of.

As many who have tried to learn GAS _also_ know, it has a pretty steep learning curve. Knowing how to set up and structure a project that will use GAS is the first hurdle, and then you need to know how to actually use and combine all the different functionalities it introduces, some of which are flexible, where others must be implemented and combined in very specific ways.

So as I said above, I was beyond excited for someone, like Stephen - someone whose knowledge and teaching style I already respected - walk me through the specifics on how GAS works and how to set it up correctly took a huge weight off my shoulders. For anyone else that also wants to take on learning GAS, I would highly recommend this course. On top of teaching GAS, this course also covered developing a game for use on a dedicated server. Double win!

### Design and Turn-Based Games

After figuring out these first learning goals, I needed to decide on what type of game I actually wanted to make. I had a number of designs that I had been adding to in the notes on my phone, over the better part of year. I loved going on walks, taking showers and other low-stimulation activities, as my brain would immediately light up with new ideas. (Less fun was, some nights, being unable to fall asleep for several hours due to the seemingly endless stream of "good ideas" my brain would produce for me, and which mostly ended up getting deleted over the next couple days) For me, this initial ideation was probably the most exciting part of the whole process; an undeveloped game could be **anything**!

With several design ideas slightly fleshed out in my notes, the common throughline with all of them was "something turn based". The reasoning behind this is, I think, closely tied to my feelings towards the selection of popular competitive multiplayer video games, today. The games in this category that are big today are mostly shooters, which ask for fast, twitch reactions and super precise control inputs. I believe these kinds of games leave out a huge group of potential players who either can't - or don't want to spend the time to - meet what these games require to keep up with their player bases. As someone who played 2-3 hours of Fortnite every day in 2018, just to keep up with the ever-improving player base, I knew I wanted to make something a little more physically forgiving. Turn-based games seemed to be an underexplored space in the competitive multiplayer body of video games.

So, the "final" core pillar of my learning and in the structure of this game was the implementation of a turn-based system. Lucky for me, some of the members of the Unreal community put together a simple working [example](https://github.com/Narxim/Narxim-GAS-Example) of a multiplayer turn-based system. As with all "simple" things in programming, getting this example to work in my own project was quite a bit more work than expected.

### Wrapping it Up

Over the 4 months following the completion of the GAS course, I would put together the prototype for a game that can be found on [my Github](https://github.com/leavemydogalone/Prototype) now! Is the code clean? Not really! Is it optimized? Definitely not! Does it work? Yes! I am super proud to say I achieved _most_ of the design and learning goals I set out to achieve in this project and can carry them forward into the next things I do. Over the next blog posts, I aim to go through some of the specific systems I implemented and am the most proud of.

For anyone interested, I have included a video in the ReadMe of the Github Repo that will walk through the specifics of the system. Also, if anyone wants to reach out to discuss game dev, programming, or anything else, please feel free to do so either over Linkedin or my contact form on the homepage and I will respond as soon as I can.

See you in the next one!
